In the last video, I ended by talking
about the term Augmented assignment
IntelliJ and PyCharm highlight errors in
our code. They also show warnings
sometimes, to indicate possible problems
with our code, even if it compiles
successfully. The third thing it can flag
up are suggestions. These are ways that
we can improve our code, and you should
generally pay attention to them. Now that
doesn't mean you have to accept them -
it's your code, after all  - but most of the
time, the suggestions will improve your
code and are based on best programming
practices. Now I can't show you this
particular suggestion, but if you're on a Mac or
Linux machine, most likely when you hover
over line 27, it'll say assignment can
be replaced with augmented assignment,
and I touched on that phrase briefly in
the previous section. I mentioned that
I'd explain it more later so let's see
what this is all about.
Well augmented assignment sounds really
fancy, but it's just a shorthand way of
assigning values to a variable.
The Python documentation describes augmented
assignment as the combination, in a
single statement, of a binary operation
and an assignment statement, which is
true but not terribly understandable.
So looking at the code on line 27 there,
guesses equals guesses plus 1, we're
performing an addition. We take the value
of guesses and add 1 to it.
We then bind the variable guesses to the
result. guesses becomes one greater than
what it was. The addition is the binary
operation, binary because it takes two
operands to work on, and then there is an
assignment. So going back to our code, to
change this code on line 27 to an
augmented assignment, we'll write it this
way: so I want to comment that line out.
On line 28 I'm gonna type guesses plus
equals 1, and that's shorthand for what
we had previously. If you were
programming in Java or C++, IntelliJ
wouldn't have suggested this change.
That's because, in those languages, both
statements are in fact identical. Their
use is just a matter of preference or style.
In Python, however, the augmented
assignment form only evaluates the
assignee, guesses in our example, once.
In the other form, where guess has appeared twice,
the variable is evaluated once
each time it happens, and that's less
efficient. Now I'll admit that the
evaluation isn't very complicated here.
After all, it's not like we're doing some
complex calculation - you know, something like
12 times 850 plus 13 million
divided by 18 is obviously going to take
a bit of time to work out. So evaluating
a variable - what do I mean by that? Well
evaluating a variable basically consists
of looking up its value. That's pretty
fast, and probably takes a small fraction
of a millisecond. But doing it twice, when
you could just do it once, is obviously
less efficient. If you do that in a loop,
going round, say, a million times, you
could be wasting a second or more. Now in
terms of efficiency, that might not sound
bad, unless your code's trying to land an
aeroplane. A jumbo jet can travel at over
600 miles per hour. At that speed,
one second represents one sixth of a
mile, or about 268 meters. Of course, if
your code's trying to land an aeroplane
without slowing it down first, then you've
probably got more serious problems than
missing an augmented assignment.
But hopefully, you get the point here.
There's also another reason why
augmented assignment is more efficient
in Python. With our first form on line 27
Python creates a new variable. It binds
that new variable to the result of
performing the calculation, then destroys
the original variable.
Using an Augmented assignment, you can
perform the operation in-place where
possible, modifying the original variable
instead of creating a new one. Now this
isn't always possible, depending on the
type of object, the variable, in question,
but it will be done in place whenever
possible. Alright, so let's switch back to
the code.
So Intellij suggests that you use
augmented assignments in your Python
code, rather than the longhand version
that we used on line 27, because
ultimately, they're more efficient.
The term augmented assignment sounds far
more complicated than it really is.
The symbol for them is just the binary
operator plus minus multiplication
divide, followed by an equal sign. You
can see the example there on line 28.
Alright so let's create a new Python
file. I'm gonna call it aa, and I'm gonna
paste in some code, just to save a bit of
time in the video. Okay, so there's the
code there. Now what I've done is, I've
added comments to the right of the code,
to show the results we'll get from each
augmented assignment. So it's easier to see
that these augmented assignments relate
directly to a normal assignment.
They're easier to type, and as they're also
more efficient, it makes sense really to
use them. So let's run the program, just to
confirm we get the expected values for x.
You can see the values there.
Scrolling down we've got 24, 20 for the
various operations, 100, 25, 5, noting this one's
now a float, 25.0, and the last value, 0.0.
Alright, so we've seen two
binary operations that can be performed
on strings; concatenation and repetition.
They can also be performed using
augmented assignment. So let's actually
type in some code here, and have a look
at that. On line 24, I'm going to type
greeting equals Good in double quotes.
Line 26, greeting plus equals morning, and
what I'm going to do there is, on line 24,
put a space before the double quote.
Moving on, I'm going to print greeting,
print parentheses greeting, just scroll up a bit
more, and on line 29 I'm gonna type
greeting star equals 5, print greeting.
Alright, so if we run the program again now, you can
see the output down the bottom of the
screen. Firstly, we get Good morning
printed out - a combination of the word Good
on line 24 and morning on line 26 using
augmented assignment. But then also, on
line 29, we've used augmented assignment
and you can see we've now got five
versions of Good morning showing on the
second line, or the last line, of output
before the program ended. And we saw that
as well, in the last section and this is
the augmented assignment way of
performing both of these things - these
two operations - concatenation and
repetition with strings. Now there's five
more binary operations that we haven't
looked at, for manipulating individual
bits as well as a matrix multiplication
operator, but we'll leave them for a
later video. So all the binary operators
can be used in augmented assignment, and
we can see the full list at the operator
precedence table, which we looked at
before. Let's just open that up again.
Loading a browser I'll paste in the link,
in the resources section as well, and
it's in section 6.16 down the end of the
page, so let's do a quick search for that.
Okay, there's operator precedence again,
towards the bottom. So you can check out
the binary operators on this page. And
again, all the binary operators can be
used in augmented assignment. Alright, so
moving on. In the next video, we'll take a
break from coding and have a look at the
style of the code that we write.
See you in the next video.